# General  

## Lists  
- Lists are mutable i.e. the object can be modified after it has been created.  
- This is unlike strings, integers, floats, tuples and dictionaries.  
- Collection of values, order matters.  
- Select, update and remove: `[]`.  
- Indexed by range of numbers.  
- Can select entire subsets.  
- `fam = [‘cat’, 1.58, 2.1, ’house, ’Liz’, 1.89, ’Jack’]`.  
- List slicing is exclusive.  
- `[start:end]`.  
- `[inclusive:exclusive]`.  

---

## Dictionaries  

## General  
- Keys are immutable objects.  
- Select, update and remove using `[ ]`.    
- Indexed by range of unique keys.  
- Lookup table with unique keys.  
- `.values()` - extracts the values from a dictionary.  

### Examples  

        world = {‘key1’:2, ‘key2’:4}  
        world[‘key1’]  
> Outputs `2`  

        world[‘key3’] = 6  
> Adds the `key3:6` pair to the end of the dictionary  

        world[‘key3’] = 8  
> Edits the value of `key3` to `8`  

        del(world[‘key3’])  
> Deletes the `key3:8` pair from the world dictionary  

        world = {‘key1’:value1, ‘key2’:value2}  
> Final output  

        myDictionary = {"name" : "David the Mildy Terrifying", "health": 186, "strength": 4, "equipped":"l33t haxx0r p0werz"}  
        for name,value in myDictionary.items():  
                print(f"{name}:{value}")  
> The `.items()` function returns the key name and value.  

---

## Methods
- These are functions that are specific to Python objects.  
- Objects have methods associated, depending on the type (i.e. list, float, string etc.) of the object.  
- Methods call functions on objects.  

### Examples
`.capitalize()` - capitalizes the first letter in a word.  
`.replace()` - input an element for replacement, but cannot be called on a list on a single string object.  
`.count()` - performs a count of elements.  
`.index()` - gets the index number of an element in a list.  
`.append()` - adds inputted element into a list.  
`.astype()` - used to change the data type of elements.  
`.unique()` - outputs unique elements.  
`.value_counts()` - counts elements.  
`.sort_values()` - sorts elements.  
`.items()` - used when iterating over a dictionary.  
`.lower()` - all letters lower case.  
`.upper()` - all letters upper case.  
`.title()` - capitalises the first letter of every word.  
`.capitalize()` - capitalises the first letter of the first word in a sentence.  
`.strip()` - removes any spaces on either side of a word.  
`.split()` - splits a string into its components.  
 
        for key, value in world.items():  
            print(key + “--” + str(value))  

---

## Packages  
- Directory of Python scripts.  
Each script is a module which specify functions, methods, types.  

---

## Print statement  
        for i in range(0, 100):  
                print(i, end=" ")  
> `end` specifies how the print function is run.  
> Can also use `"\n"`, `"\t"`, `"\v"`.  

        print("If you put ", "\033[33m", "nothing as the ", "\033[35m", "end character ", "\033[32m", "then you don't ", "\033[0m", "get odd gaps ", sep="")  
> Printing in color
> `\033[33m` - yellow.  
> `\033[35m` - purple.  
> `\033[32m` - green.  
> `\033[0m` - default.  
> `sep` or separator, tells the computer what text to put between arguments.  

---

## F-strings  
- F-string literals.  

### Example  
        name = "Katie"  
        age = "28"  
        pronouns = "she/her"  

        print(f"This is {name}, using {pronouns} pronouns, and is {age} years old. Hello, {name}. How are you? Have you been having a great {age} years so far")  

### Example (alignment)  
        for i in range(1, 31):  
        print(f"Day {i: <2} of 30")  
> left = `<`, right = `>`, center = `^`  

---  

## Random library  
- `import random`  

### Example use cases  

        random.randint(0,90)  

        new_list = ["Name1", "Name2", "Name3", "Name4"]  
        random.choice(new_list)  
