# Visualisations  

## Matplotlib  
-	Data visualization package in Python  
-	The subpackage is pyplot  

## Import statement  

        import matplotlib.pyplot as plt  
        plt.plot(x,y) - line graph  
        plt.show()  

## Labels  

        plt.xlabel(‘x label’)  
> x axis label  
        plt.ylabel(‘y label’) - y axis label
        plt.title(‘title’) - title label
        plt.yticks([0,2,4,6,8]) - allows you to set the intervals on the y axis

VISUALIZING YOUR DATA

dog_pack[‘height_cm’].hist(bins = 20) - creates a histogram with 20 bins of the height data

avg_weight_by_breed.plot(kind = ‘bar’, title = ‘Bar plot’) - creates a bar graph of the data (dog breed vs weight) with the title “Bar plot”.

sully.plot(x = ‘date’, y = ‘weight_kg’, kind = ‘line’, rot = 45) - creates a line plot of (years vs weight) and rotates the x labels by 45 degrees

dog_pack.plot(x = height_cm, y = ‘weight_kg’, kind = scatter) - scatter plot of (height vs weight) of dogs

Plotting two plots on top of one another. Use alpha for transparency
dog_pack[dog_pack[‘sex’] == ‘F’][‘height_cm].hist(alpha = 0.7)
dog_pack[dog_pack[‘sex’] == ‘M’][‘height_cm].hist(alpha = 0.7)
plt.legend([‘F’, ‘M’]) - creates a key on the graph	
plt.show()

Missing values

dogs.isna() - identifies missing values as booleans
dogs.isna().any() - identifies whether there are any missing values in a column by outputting a boolean of True to say there is at least one missing value in that column
dogs.isna().sum() OR dogs.isnull().sum() - calculates the sum of the booleans of missing values i.e. tells you how many missing values there are in each column

dogs.drop(columns = ‘Name’, inplace = True)
dogs.dropna() - drops all rows with missing data
dogs.fillna(0) - replaces all missing data with 0

### Example  

Seaborn is a data visualisation library built on top of matplotlib and closely integrated with Pandas data structures.  

        %matplotlib inline  
        import seaborn as sns  
        sns.set_style("darkgrid")  

> Select rows where both 'Rating' and 'Size' values are present (ie. the two values are not null)  

        apps_with_size_and_rating_present = apps[(apps["Rating"] != 0) & (apps['Size'] != 0)]  

> Subset for categories with at least 250 apps  

        large_categories = apps_with_size_and_rating_present.groupby("Category").filter(lambda x: len(x) >= 250)

>  Plot size vs. rating  

        plt1 = sns.jointplot(x = large_categories["Rating"], y = large_categories["Size"])

> Select apps whose 'Type' is 'Paid'  

        paid_apps = apps[apps['Type']=='Paid']

> Plot price vs. rating  
        plt2 = sns.jointplot(x = paid_apps["Rating"], y = paid_apps["Price"])


INTRODUCTION TO DATA VISUALIZATION WITH MATPLOTLIB


Subplots/Small multiples
.subplots() are part of the matplotlib library - multiple small plots that show similar data across different conditions e.g. precipitation data across different cities.
Small multiples are called subplots in matplotlib - used to overcome the issues of having to plot too much data.
Can be used to compare multiple plots side-by-side.
Useful when creating a figure with multiple axes.


Syntax
Import matplotlib.pyplot as plt - .pyplot is a sub module

Adding data to a figure is done by calling methods of the Axes object.
fig, ax = plt.subplots() -  when called without any inputs subplots creates two objects: 1. fig - figure, holds everything we see 2. ax - axes, holds the data


Plot method
Ax is the object and .plot is the method

ax.plot(seattle_weather[“MONTH”], seattle_weather[“MLY-TAVG-NORMAL”] - this is a plotting command, which is a method of the axis object. The first argument is the x coordinate and the second is the y coordinate


Arguments for ax.plot() function

marker = ‘o’ - adds a markers shaped like an ‘o’ for x,y coordinates on the graph
https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/markers_api.html - visit this link for all marker styles
linestyle = ‘--’ - changes the line style to ‘--’
https://matplotlib.org/2.0.1/api/lines_api.html - visit this link for more line styles
linestyle = ‘none’ - eliminates the line and only shows the markers
color = ‘r’ - changes the color of the markers and line to red


Set methods
Used to change certain properties of the object

ax.set_xlabel(“Time (months)”) - setting the name of the x label. Only capitalize the first word in an axis label, unless subsequent words are proper nouns
ax.set_ylabel(“Average temperature”) - adds y label
ax.set_title(“Weather in Seattle”) - adds a title


Subplots part 2

Adding data to a figure is done by calling methods of the Axes object.
fig, ax = plt.subplots(3,2) - creates an array of subplots with 3 rows and 2 columns i.e. 6 subplots
ax[0,0].plot = (seattle_weather[“MONTH”], seattle_weather[“MLY-TAVG-NORMAL”]) - sets the subplot at row 0, column 0.

REMEMBER - even though we created the subplot as an array (3,2) the top left plot is at coordinates [0,0], the top right plot is at [0,1], bottom right [2,1] etc.

fig, ax = plt.subplots(2,1, sharey = True) - sharey set to True means both subplots will have the same range of y-axis values

Exception: when the array is 1-dimensional i.e. fig, ax = plt.subplots(2,1) - 2 rows and 1 column - when setting the subplot at [0,0] we just use [0] and similarly when setting the second row we just use [1]


Plotting Time Series

Reading in a csv file with date data in string format:

climate_change = pd.read_csv(“climate_change.csv”, parse_dates = True, index_col = 0) 

By setting parse_dates = True Python sets all date data to DateTime Python objects. Setting index_col = 0 tells Python to treat the first column as the index.

If we call print(climate_change.index) Python prints a list of the index, which has been set to the date column in this case (as the first column consisted of dates).


Plotting Time Series with different variables

If we want to plot two sets of data with the same x-axis and but whose y-axes scales differ we use the following line of code in line 2:

Line 1: 	ax.plot(climate_change.index, climate_change[‘Co2’])  - 1st plot
Line 2:		ax2 = ax.twinx() - twin axes object
Line 3:		ax2.plot(climate_change.index, climate_change[‘relative_temp’]) - 2nd plot

If we want to change the color of the ticks and tick marks on the x or y axis we use the following method and pass the argument ‘y’ or ‘x’ depending on which ticks we want to change.
ax.tick_params(‘y’, colors = ‘blue’)


Function that plots time series data
Defining functions allows us to reuse the same code without having to repeat all of it.
The function calls the methods of the axes object

def plot_timeseries(ax, x, y, color, xlabel, ylabel):
	ax.plot(x, y, color = color)
	ax.set_xlabel(xlabel)
	ax.set_ylabel(ylabel)
	ax.tick_params(‘y’, colors = color)

Using the function:
Line 1:		plot_timeseries(ax, climate_change.index, climate_change[‘co2’], ‘blue’,
‘Time’, ‘Co2 (ppm)’)
Line 2:		ax2 = ax.twinx()
Line 3:		plot_timeseries(ax2, climate_change.index, 
climate_change[‘relative_temp’], ‘red’,‘Time’, ‘Relative temperature’)


Annotating Time Series data

https://matplotlib.org/stable/tutorials/text/annotations.html  - visit this link for all matplotlib annotation documentation

ax.annotate(“>1 degree”, xy = (pd.TimeStamp(‘2015-10-06’), 1), xytext = (pd.TimeStamp(‘2008-10-06’), -0.2), arrowprops = {“arrowstyle”: “->”, “color”:”gray”})

“>1 degree”  - refers to the annotation text
 xy = (pd.TimeStamp(‘2015-10-06’) - is the coordinates the text refers to
xytext = (pd.TimeStamp(‘2008-10-06’), -0.2) - is the coordinates where the text is placed
arrowprops = {“arrowstyle”: “->”, “color”:”gray”}) - a dictionary of arrowstyle and arrow colo


Quantitative comparisons and statistical visualizations

Stacked bar charts
A stacked bar chart contains bars, where the height of each bar represents values. In addition, stacked on top of the first variable may be another variable. The additional height of this bar represents the value of this variable.

Line 1:	fig, ax = plt.subplots() - initializing the figure and axes objects
Line 2:	ax.bar(medals.index, medals[“Gold”], label = “Gold) - adds a bar graph and the label 
“Gold” which will be represented on the graph when the legend method is called later
Line 3:	ax.bar(medals.index, medals[“Silver”], bottom = medals[“Gold”], label = “Silver”)
Creates a stacked bar chart where gold medals are visually represented below the silver medals	
Line 4:	ax.bar(medals.index, medals[“Bronze”], bottom = medals[“Gold”] + 
medals[“Silver”],label = “Bronze”) 
Adds bronze medals and stacks gold and silver medals are visually below. The order here doesn’t matter as gold will be at the bottom given that it was defined first in the argument in Line 3
Line 5: ax.set_xticklabels(medals.index, rotation = 90) - sets labels for each tick on the x 
axis and rotates them by 90 degrees
Line 6:	ax.legend() - call the axes legend method which adds in a legend
Line 7: plt.show()


Histograms
Shows the number of observations (on the y-axis) within a particular ‘bin’ of values (on the x-axis)
Line 1:	ax.hist(mens_rowing[“Height”], label = “Rowing”, bins = 20, histtype = “step”)
By default the number of bins is 10. Can also pass a list to bins = [10,20,30,40,50] which would be the boundaries between individual bins. 
By default histtype = “bar”, however if multiple histograms are plotted they can obscure each other. Setting histtype = “step” only show the outlines of the bars
Line 2: ax.set_xlabel(“Height in cm”)
Line 3:	ax.set_ylabel(“# of observations”)
Line 4:	ax.legend()


Statistical plotting

ax.bar(“Rowing”, mens_rowing[“Height”].mean(), yerr = mens_rowing[“Height”].std())
Bar graph with the x tick mark “Rowing”. The yerr argument adds markers to the graph. In in this case it adds just one marker showing the standard deviation

ax.errorbar(seattle_weather[“MONTH”], seattle_weather[“AVG_TEMP”], yerr = seattle_weather[“STD_TEMP”])
The errorbar method, of the axes object, produces a line chart plotting month vs average temperature and places markers of standard deviation for each month (based on the STD_TEMP column)

Line 1:	ax.boxplot([mens_rowing[“Height”], mens_gymnastics[“Height”]])
Takes in a list into the boxplot methods and outputs two boxplots of height for rowing and gymnastics
Line 2:	ax.set_xticklables([“Rowing”, “Gymnastics”])
Notice the square brackets to specify the list of x-axis labels


Scatter plots
Useful for bi-variate comparison i.e. comparing two variables (such as the relationship between height and weight)

Line 1:	fig, ax = plt.subplots()
Line 2:	ax.scatter(climate_change[“co2”], climate_change[“relative_temp”], c = climate_change.index)
	Note that climate_change.index refers to the date column in this DataFrame. The 
argument c = is a color encoding argument that displays different colors for the range 
of variables passed to this argument.

Plot styles

Refer to the link below for different plot styles
https://matplotlib.org/stable/gallery/style_sheets/style_sheets_reference.html

plt.style.use(“ggplot”) - plot style from the ggplot library
plt.style.ust(“Solarize_Light2”) - cool style
plt.style.use(“default”) - reverts back to the original style

Seaborn is a library for statistical visualization that is based on Matplotlib.

Saving your plot to a file

fig.savefig(“gold_medals.png”) - this file format provides lossless compression of image (high quality and large file size). 

fig.savefig(“gold_medal.jpg”, quality = 50) - use .jpg for lossy compression if you want to use less space and lower quality. The argument quality takes in a number from 1 to 100 depending on the quality you desire. Avoid values>95 as the compression is no longer effective
 
fig.savefig(“gold_medal.svg”) - produces a vector graphics file which can be edited by advanced graphics software

fig.savefig(“gold_medals.png”,dpi = 300) - the dpi (dots-per-inch) argument refers to quality with which the image is rendered


fig.set_size_inches([5,3]) - 1st number sets width, 2nd number sets height. This determines the aspect ratio

If we then call the Unix function:
ls - this provides a lists of file in the present directory


Automating figures from data
One of the main strengths of Matplotlib is that it can be automated to adapt to the data that it receives as input. For example, if you receive data that has an unknown number of categories, you can still create a bar plot that has bars for each category.

sports = [“Rowing”, “Baseball”, “Tennis, “Soccer”]

fig, ax = plt.subplots()
for x in sports:
	sport_df = summer_2016_medals[summer_2016_medals[“Sport”] == x]
	# pulls all rows where the value in the “Sport” column is equal to x
	ax.bar(x, sport_df[“Height”].mean(), yerr = sport_df[“Height”].std()
ax.set_ylabel(“Height (cm)”)
ax.set_xticklabels(sport, rotation = 90)
plt.show()


Where to go next
Refer to the site below

https://matplotlib.org/2.0.2/gallery.html

3D images
https://matplotlib.org/2.0.2/mpl_toolkits/mplot3d/tutorial.html

Creating colorful images
https://matplotlib.org/2.0.2/users/image_tutorial.html

Animated visuals
https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/animation_api.html

(Pandas & Matplotlib) using Seaborn
https://seaborn.pydata.org/examples/index.html
https://seaborn.pydata.org/examples/index.html


INTRODUCTION TO DATA VISUALIZATION WITH SEABORN

1. Introduction to Seaborn

Built on top of Matplotlib.
Handles lots of the complexity in the background.
Works well with Pandas data structures.

Steps in data analysis:
1.	Gather data
2.	Transform & clean
3.	Exploration
4.	Analyze and build models
5.	Communicate results

Seaborn is useful for steps 3 & 5 in the data analysis journey.

Syntax:

import seaborn as sns
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

x = [180, 175, 178]
y = [74,80, 82]
sns.scatterplot(x = height, y = weight)
plt.show()

region = [South Africa, US, South Africa, Holland, Holland, South Africa]
sns.countplot(y = region) - displays the region on the y-axis, while the x-axis displays a bar graph of the count/number in each region. You can either set the y or x axis depending on how you want the bars displayed i.e. horizontally (set y) or vertically (set x)


Creating a plot from a DataFrame

sns.countplot(x = “how_masculine”, data =df) - we are plotting the column how_masculine from the DataFrame df. If you want the bars to be horizontal, instead of vertical, set y = “how_masculine”, instead of x


Adding a third variable with hue (subgroups)

sns.scatterplot(x = “total_bill”, y = “tips”, data = tips, hue = “smoker”) - the hue argument adds a third variable which adds color to the various x and y coordinates based on whether that person is a smoker or not. Seaborn also adds a legend to identify what each color means. 

Additional arguments
hue_order = [“Yes”, “No”] - assigns the order to the legend
palette = {“Yes”: “black”, “No”: “red”} - sets the colors for the hue

Matplotlib colors
“blue”/”b”
“green”/”g”
“red”/”r”
“cyan”/”c”
“magenta”/”m”
“yellow”/”y”
“black”/”k”
“white”/”w”


2. Visualising two quantitative variables

Relational plots/Subplots
Used to show the relationship between two quantitative variables i.e. scatter plots and line plots

relplot() - relational plot. Supports making subplots.

sns.relplot(x = “total_bill”, y = “tips”, data = tips, kind = ‘scatter’, col = ‘smoker’, row = ‘time’) - the argument kind can either be ‘scatter’ or ‘line’. Setting the col argument produces two separate plots: one for smokers and one for non-smokers. The row argument creates another two plots on the row below. The col argument arranges the plots side-by-side. The row argument arranges the plots vertically.


Additional arguments
col_wrap = 2 - sets the maximum number of columns for subplots equal to 2 i.e. 2 columns of plots
col_order = [ ] - pass a list of the order you want the plots to appear in


Customising scatter plots
These arguments can be used for either relplot() or scatterplot(), but relplot() offers more flexibility so it is better to use

size = “weights” - set the size of each point based on the weights column in the data set
hue = “weights” - changes the colour of each point based on the weights column
style = “smoker” - uses different point styles for each value of the variable i.e. yes and no are assigned different styles
alpha 0.4 - changes the transparency. 0 is completely transparent and 1 is fully transparent


Introduction to line plots

Set the argument kind = “line”.
If there are multiple observations per x-value then the line plot displays the mean of these values.
Seaborn automatically calculates a confidence region displayed by the shaded region around the line plot. This indicates the uncertainty with respect to the mean value. We are 95% confident that the mean falls within this region of the plot.

Setting the argument ci = “cd” shows the shaded region around the plot as the standard deviation rather than the confidence level. This shows us the distribution of observations.

Setting ci = None turns off the shaded area.

Customising line plots
markers = True - places markers on a line plot for each data point
dashes = False - turns off dashed lines in a line plot


3. Visualising a categorical and a quantitative variable

Categorical plots
Categorical plots include: count plots, bar plots, box plots and point plots

catplot() - similar functionality to relplot() but used to plot the distribution of a quantitative variable by category. Supports making subplots

Use col and row parameters to add subplots, in addition to hue


Count plots
Previously:	sns.countplot(x = “how_masculine”, data =masculinity_data)
Now:		sns.catplot(x = “how_masculine”, data =masculinity_data, kind = ‘count’)

Additional arguments
order = [ ] - pass a list into this parameter to set the order you want the categories to appear on the plot


Bar plots
Bar plots show the mean of a quantitative variable per category.
By default Seaborn shows the 95% confidence level for these means, which show us the level of uncertainty.

sns.catplot(x = ‘day’, y = ‘total_bill’, data = tips, kind = ‘bar’)

Additional arguments
ci = None - turns off the confidence intervals

Note
When the y-variable is True/False, bar plots will show the percentage of responses reporting True. This plot shows us that males report a much higher interest in math compared to females.


Box plots
Useful for comparing categorical data (such as days of the week) across quantitative variables (such as total tips)

sns.catplot(x = ‘day’, y = ‘total_bill’, data = tips, kind = ‘box’)

Additional arguments
sym = “ ” - passing an empty string into this parameter will omit the outliers in the box plot.
whis = 2.0 - by default the whiskers are set to 1.5 * IQR (interquartile range = Q3 - Q1).
whis = [5, 95] - alternatively this will specify the lower whisker be drawn at the 5th percentile and the upper whisker at the 95th percentile.
whis = [0, 100] - places the whiskers at the min and max values.


Point plots
Shows the mean of a quantitative variable for each category as a point.
The confidence interval for the mean is drawn as a vertical line (95% confidence interval).

sns.catplot(x = “age”, y = “masculinity_important”, data = masculinity_data, hue = “feel_masculine”, kind = “point”)

Additional arguments
join = False - removes the joining lines between mean values
capsize = 0.2 - changes the size of the caps at the end of each confidence interval line
ci = None - turns off the confidence interval off and just shows the mean value

Displaying the median instead of the mean
from numpy import median
sns.catplot(x = “smoker”, y = “total_bill”, data = tips, kind = “point”, estimator = median) - instead of plotting the mean, setting the estimator argument to median plots the median values


4. Customising Seaborn plots

Changing plot style and color

sns.set_style(“whitegrid”) - changes the background to show a whitegrid. You can also pass in “dark”, “white”, “darkgrid” and “ticks” (adds tick marks to x and y axis)

sns.set_palette(“RdBu”) - this a scale of colours. 
Can also pass in:
Diverging palettes: “PRGn”, “RdBu_r”, “PRGn_r”; or
Sequential palettes: “Greys”, “Blues”, “PuRd”, “GnBu”, “Purples”

custom_palette = [“red”, “green”, “orange”]
sns.set_palette[custom_palette] - set your own custom palette


Changing the scale

sns.set_context() - changes the size of the scale. Pass in the arguments: “paper” (smallest - use in a paper session), “notebook” (use in an iPython Notebook), “talk” (use in a talk/presentation) or “poster” (largest - use in a poster session)


Adding titles and labels
Must first determine whether the plot is a FacetGrid and AxesSubplot.
relplot() and catplot() are FacetGrids (can create subplots) while scatterplot(), countplot(), boxplot() etc. are AxesSubplots (only creates a single plot)

Do this by setting:

g = sns.scatterplot(x = ‘height’, y = ‘weight’, data = df)
type(g) - determine the type of the plot. If it is a FacetGrid then use the code below.

For a FacetGrid type object:
g.fig.suptitle(“New Title”, y = 1.05) - the y parameter sets the height of the label. The default height is 1.

For an AxesSubplot type object:
g.fig.suptitle(“New Title”, y = 1.05) - setting the main title
g.set_title(“This is {col_name}”) - this will set each subplot title based on the name in the column

Axis labels (for both FacetGrid and AxesSubplot objects):
g.set(xlabel = “New x label”, ylabel = “New y label”)

To rotate labels (for both FacetGrid and AxesSubplot objects):
plt.xticks(rotation = 90)


INTERMEDIATE DATA VISUALIZATION WITH SEABORN

1. Seaborn introduction
Seaborn leverages Matplotlib and integrates with Pandas.
Built on Matplotlib and works best with Pandas’ DataFrames.
Has embedded functionality that makes visualizations look better.
Seaborn generally does more statistical analysis on data and can provide more sophisticated insight into the data.


Using the distribution plot

Matplotlib histogram
df[‘alcohol’].plot.hist()
plt.show()
plt.clf() - clears the plot

Seaborn version of a histogram
Gaussian Kernel Density Estimate (KDE) function
The KDE helps to smooth the distribution and is a useful way to look at the data.
sns.distplot(df[‘alcohol’])
plt.show()

Additional arguments (creates standard histogram without Seaborn extras)
sns.distplot(df[‘alcohol’], kde = False, bins = 10)
plt.show()

Additional arguments
kde = False - disables the KDE output and turns the KDE function into a standard histogram
hist = False - shows the outline of the histogram bars as a line, but omits the bars
rug = True - draws a rugplot on the x-axis (small vertical lines to show each observation in the distribution)
kde_kws = {‘shade’: True} - shades the plot by passing in the kde keywords dictionary


Regression plots
The previous analysis we have done is called univariate analysis as we only look at one variable.
Regression analysis is bivariate as we look for relationships between two variables

sns.regplot(x = ‘alcohol’, y = ‘pH’, data = df)
-	Must explicitly define x and y variables and source of the data. The x and y variables refer to the columns in the DataFrame - we don’t subset the DataFrame as we explicitly define the source of the data as one of the arguments.

regplot() vs lmplot()
Both produce similar results but the lmplot() is much more powerful

Additional arguments lmplot()
hue = ‘type’ - overlays two plots of different colors distinguished by type
col = ‘type’ - creates two separate plots (stacked horizontally) distinguished by type
row = ‘type’ - creates two separate plots (stacked vertically) distinguished by type

Note
Faceting: plotting multiple graphs while changing a single variable. Use the col or row argument to do this.



2. Customizing Seaborn plots

Setting styles
sns.set() - default Seaborn style applied to a chart
sns.set_style() - pass in either of the arguments ‘white’, dark’, ‘whitegrid’, ‘darkgrid’, ‘ticks’
sns.despine(left = True) - removes the y axis spine to make chart look cleaner


Colors
We are able to apply Matplotlib color codes

sns.set(color_codes = True)
# Matplotlib color codes can now be applied
sns.distplot(df[‘Tuition’], color = ‘g’)

sns.set_palette() - set the color palette. Can pass either of the arguments ‘deep’, ‘muted’, ‘pastel’, ‘bright’, ‘dark’, ‘colorblind’


Example to loop through multiple chart colors
for p in [‘deep’, ‘pastel’]:
	sns.set_palette(p)
	sns.distplot(df[‘fmr_3’])
	plt.show()


Palettes
Three types of palettes: sequential (continuous order), diverging (high vs low) and circular (no particular order to data)

sns.set_palette(“RdBu”) - this a scale of colours. 


Viewing palettes
Use sns.palplot() to view the palette when calling sns.color_palette

sns.palplot(sns.color_palette(“Blues”, 6) - contains 6 colors from the “Blues” palette 
plt.show() - shows the palettes


Customising with Matplotlib
Most of the time, you can use the Seaborn API to modify your visualizations but sometimes it is helpful to use matplotlib's functions to customize your plots. 
Available through Matplotlib’s axes objects.
Once you have an axes object, you can perform a lot of customization of your plot.


Example
fig, ax = plt.subplots()
sns.distplot(df[‘Tuition’], ax = ax)
ax.set(xlabel = “Tuition 2013”, ylabel = “Distribution”, xlim = (0, 50000), title = “Tuition and fees”)
# xlim sets a limit range between $0 - $50,000


Example
fig, (ax0, ax1) = plt.subplots(nrows = 1, ncols = 2, sharey = True, figsize = (7,4))
# sharey means the subplots will have the same range of y axis values
sns.distplot(df[‘Tuition’], ax = ax0)
# 1st plot
sns.distplot(df[‘Fees’], ax = ax1)
# 2nd plot
ax0.set(xlabel = “Tuition 2013”, ylabel = “Distribution”)
# sets the labels for ax0 
ax1.axvline(x = 20000, label = ‘My budget’, linestyle = ‘--’)
# draws a vertical line at x = 20000 on the ax1 plot
# could also set x = df[‘Fees’].mean() to show the mean
ax1.legend()
# turns on the legend for the axvline for the ax1 plot



3. Additional plot types

Categorical plot types
sns.stripplot(data = df, y = ‘drg definition’, x = ‘average cover charge’, jitter = True)
# plots each observation
sns.swarmplot(data = df, y = ‘drg definition’, x = ‘average cover charge’) 
# swarmplot does not scale well to large data sets
# plots each observation
sns.boxplot(data = df, y = ‘drg definition’, x = ‘average cover charge’)
sns.violinplot(data = df, y = ‘drg definition’, x = ‘average cover charge’)
# combination of the boxplot and KDE function
sns.lvplot(data = df, y = ‘drg definition’, x = ‘average cover charge’)
# the Letter Value plot is a hybrid between box and violin plot

Statistical summaries of categorical data
sns.barplot(data = df, y = ‘drg definition’, x = ‘average cover charge’, hue = ‘region’)
# shows the confidence interval
sns.pointplot(data = df, y = ‘drg definition’, x = ‘average cover charge’, hue = ‘region’)
# shows the confidence interval
sns.countplot(data = df, y = ‘drg definition’, hue = ‘region’)
# shows the number of instances of each variable
# N.B. only specify either the x or y variable as the other variable becomes the count of that variable

Example
sns.violinplot(data=df, x='Award_Amount', y='Model Selected', palette='husl')
# sets the palette color
# other colors include ‘Paired’


Regression plots
sns.regplot(data = df, x = ‘temp’, y = ‘total_rentals’, marker = ‘+’)
# plots a linear regression model 
sns.residplot(data = df, x = ‘temp’, y = ‘total_rentals’)
# plots the residuals of a linear regression model
sns.regplot(data = df, x = ‘temp’, y = ‘total_rentals’, order = 2)
# Seabron attempts to fit a polynomial function to the data
sns.regplot(data = df, x = ‘month’, y = ‘total_rentals’, x_jitter = .1)
# regression plot of a categorical variable showing the distribution by month
sns.regplot(data = df, x = ‘month’, y = ‘total_rentals’, x_estimator = np.mean)
sns.regplot(data = df, x = ‘temp’, y = ‘total_rentals’, x_bins = 4, color = ‘g’)
# divides the temperatures into 4 bins and sets color to green

Additional arguments
fit_reg = False - disables the regression line


Matrix plots
heatmap() - requires data to be in a grid format
crosstab() - pandas function used to manipulate data into a grid format

Example 1
new_heatmap = pd.crosstab(df[‘month’], df[‘weekday’], values = df[‘total_rentals’], aggfunc = ‘mean’)
sns.heatmap(new_heatmap)

Additional arguments
annot = True - turns on annotations in the individual cells
fmt =’d’ - format argument ensures results are displayed as integars
cmap = ‘YlGnBu’ - changes color combination (yellow, green, blue)
cbar = False - the color bar is not displayed
linewidths = 0.5 - creates small spacing between each cell so that they are easier to view
center = new_heatmap.loc(9,6) - centers the heatmap colors on a specific set of coordinates

Example 2
sns.heatmap(new_heatmap.corr()) - plots the heatmap based on correlations between the columns specified in the crosstab function





4. Creating plots on data aware grids

FacetGrid()
Seaborn's FacetGrid is the foundation for building data-aware grids. A data-aware grid allows you to create a series of small plots that can be useful for understanding complex data relationships.
Analyzing data with many variables - compare multiple plots using the same scales and axes.

Two step process:
1.	Create a FacetGrid object with columns (col), rows (row) or hue (hue); and
2.	Mapping individual plots to the grid

Example
g = sns.FacetGrid(data = df, col = ‘HIGHDEG’)
g.map(sns.boxplot, ‘Tuition’)


factorplot()
Shortcut by combining faceting and mapping into one function

Example
sns.factorplot(x = ‘Tuition’, data =df, col = ‘HIGHDEG, kind = ‘box’)


lmplot()
The lmplot is used to plot scatter plots with regression lines on FacetGrid objects. The API is similar to factorplot with the difference that the default behavior of lmplot is to plot regression lines.

Example
sns.lmplot(data=df, x='UG', y='PCTPELL', col="Degree_Type", col_order = [‘Graduate’, ‘Bachelors’])
plt.show()


PairGrid()
You don’t define x and y as you want to examine all pairwise relationships between the data specified. Used to understand the best set of features to explain a relationship between variables.

Example 1
g = sns.PairGrid(data = df, vars = [‘Fair_mkt_rent’, ‘Median_Income’]
# we don’t define x and y variables as Seaborn will vary the x and y variables for each of the plots
g.map(plt.scatter)

Example 2
g = sns.PairGrid(data = df, vars = [‘Fair_mkt_rent’, ‘Median_Income’])
# we don’t define x and y variables as Seaborn will vary the x and y variables for each of the plots
g.map_diag(plt.hist)
# refers to the main diagonal from top left to bottom right
g.map_offdiag(plt.scatter)
# defines the diagonal plots as either a histogram or scatter plot


pairplot()
Works similar to FactorPlot

Example 1
g = sns.pairplot(data = df, vars = [‘Fair_mkt_rent’, ‘Median_Income’], kind = ‘reg’, diag_kind = ‘hist’)

Example 2
g = sns.pairplot(data = df.query(‘Bedrms < 3’), vars = [‘Fair_mkt_rent’, ‘Median_Income’, ‘Utility’], hue = ‘Bedrms’, palette = ‘husl’, plot_kws = {‘alpha’: 0.5})
# plots a third variable (there are now 9 plots)

Additional arguments
diag_kws = {‘alpha’: 0.5} - changes the transparency of the other diagonal plots


JointGrid
Seaborn's JointGrid combines univariate plots such as histograms, rug plots and kde plots with bivariate plots such as scatter and regression plots
Similar to the other grid plots.

Example 1
g = sns.JointGrid(data = df, x = ‘Tuition’, y = ‘ADM_RATE_ALL’)
# must define the x and y variables
g.map(sns.regplot, sns.distplot)
# the main plot is a regression plot and the two side plots (marginal plots) are distribution plots

Example 2
g = sns.JointGrid(data = df, x = ‘Tuition’, y = ‘ADM_RATE_ALL’)
g.plot_joint(sns.kdeplot)
# this is the center plot
g.plot_marginals(sns.kdeplot, shade = True)
# this is the plot on the margins
g.annotate(stas.pearsonr)
# annotates the plot with the Pearson correlation value


jointplot
Easier to use but has fewer customizations than the JointGrid

Example 1
sns.jointplot(data = df, x = ‘Tuition’, y = ‘ADM_RATE_ALL’, kind = ‘hex’)
# hex plot has been used

Additional arguments
xlim = (0, 25000) - sets the limits for the x-axis
Example 2
The jointplot is a convenience wrapper around many of the JointGrid functions. However, it is possible to overlay some of the JointGrid plots on top of the standard jointplot.

g = (sns.jointplot(x="temp",
             y="registered",
             kind='scatter',
             data=df,
             marginal_kws=dict(bins=10, rug=True))
    .plot_joint(sns.kdeplot))

plt.show()


When to use each Seaborn plots
distplot() is the best place to start to see the relationship between variables
rugplot() and kdeplot() can be useful alternatives

lmplot() is a regression plot that supports facetting. Combines features of the scatterplot, regplot and residplot. Best function for determining linear relationships between data

factorplot() - use this if you need to facet the data

pairplot() & jointplot() - useful after you have done preliminary analysis using lmplot(). Then apply the distplot function to pairplot() or jointplot()
