# Object Oriented Programming  
- Object Oriented Programming (OOP) is a programming paradigm (a way of thinking about how to solve a problem) that is based on classes and objects, which store all of their data and behaviors inside them.  
- You can think of a class like a cookie cutter, or template. It has pre-defined characteristics (shape, size etc).  
- Objects are like the cookies created using the cutter. They all get the same size and shape, but then we can personalize each one (sprinkles, icing, etc).  
- Some programming languages, like Java, are entirely based on OOP.  
- This approach lets us create a template for something like an enemy in a video game, and then use that template to create, say, 20 enemies. Instead of having to code each one individually.  
- It's very powerful for large scale projects.  

## Classes  
- The init (short for initialisation) subroutine tells the class what to do when it is used to create each instance.  
- A class will contain all the characteristics (think variables).  
- Instantiation means 'use the template to create an object'.  

        def__init__(self, ):
            code here

> The variable `self` must be included and refers to the actual instance of the class i.e. itself.  

## Methods  
- Subroutines inside an object are called methods.  

### Example  

        class animal:  
            species = None  
            name = None  
            sound = None  

        def __init__(self, name, species, sound):  
            self.name = name  
            self.species = species  
            self.sound = sound  

        def talk(self):  
            print((f"{self.name} says {self.sound}"))  

        dog = animal("Brian", "Canine", "Woof")  
        dog.talk()  

        cow = animal("Ermintrude", "Bo Taurus", "Moo")  
        cow.talk()  

> The *instantiation* is performed in the following lines: `dog = animal("Brian", "Canine", "Woof")` and `cow = animal("Ermintrude", "Bo Taurus", "Moo")`.  
> In these lines, a new *instance* of the animal class is created with the provided arguments for the name, species, and sound attributes.  
> The `__init__` method is called to *initialize* the object with the provided values.  

## Inheritance  
- Inheritance means that we can take the template from the animal class and break it down into sub-classes that use all the attributes and methods from that class, but also add their own attributes.  
- When I create the sub-class, I use the name of its parent class as a parameter.  
- This means 'get all the features of animal and use them here too'.  

### Example  
        
        class animal:  
            species = None  
            name = None  
            sound = None  

        def __init__(self, name, species, sound):  
            self.name = name  
            self.species = species  
            self.sound = sound  

        class bird(animal):  

        def __init__(self, color):  
            self.name = "Bird"  
            self.species = "Avian"  
            self.sound = "Tweet"  
            self.color = color  

        polly = bird("Green")  
        print(polly.name)  

> The parameter `color` only applies to the `bird` class.  
> The remaining features `name`, `species`, `sound` are inherited from the parent class `animal`.  
> By adding a new `__init__` method in the `bird` class and providing the `color` parameter, we extend the functionality of the `bird` class to include an additional attribute specific to birds.  
> This means that instances of the `bird` class will have both the inherited attributes from the `animal` class and the specific attribute of the bird class, `color`.  

---

