# Exploratory Data Analysis  

## Steps in data analysis  
1.	Gather data  
2.	Transform & clean  
3.	Exploration  
4.	Analyze and build models  
5.	Communicate results  

## Methods for exploration  
`data = df.copy()` best practice to create a copy of your DataFrame up front prior to any exploration and transformation.  
`.describe()` provides the count, mean, std, min, Q1, Q2, Q3, and max.  
`.info()` lists number of rows, columns, non-null value count, and Dtypes.  
`df.columns` outputs all columns in the DataFrame.  
`df.column.values` outputs all values in the column in a 1D array.  
`.count()` performs a count of elements.  
`.index()` gets the index number of an element in a list.  
`.unique()` outputs unique elements.  
`.value_counts()` counts elements in each column.  
`.value_counts(normalize=True)` outputs the proportion that category comprises of the total.  
`.sort_values()` sorts elements.  
`.sort_values(by='Area', ascending=False)` sorts the DataFrame by the Area column in descending order.  
`.items()` used when iterating over a dictionary.  
`df.reset_index(inplace=True)` reset the column headings. Useful when the headings are on different lines and you want them on one line.  
`df.set_index('species')` sets the species column to the index.  
`.endswith()` useful for extracting certain text or dates.  
`.head().tolist()` converts data to list format.  
`.isna()` when applied to a DataFrame it returns a DataFrame of booleans.  
`.isnull()` when applied to a DataFrame it returns a DataFrame of booleans.  
`.isnull().sum()` returns the sum of the number of missing values in all columns.  
`df['column'].isnull().any()` checks whether there are any missing (null) values in the specified column of the DataFrame df.  
`.notna()` used to determine which values in the DataFrame are not null.  
`.select_dtypes(include = ['float64', 'int64'])` only selects columns in the DataFrame that contain floats and integars. You can also pass in the `exclude` argument.  
`data.dtypes.value_counts()` counts the number of each data type.  
`.duplicated(subset = 'ride_id')` finds duplicate rows based on the ride_id column.  
`sum(data.duplicated(subset="car_ID"))` sums the number of duplicated rows in the car_ID column.  
`.corr()['SalePrice']` shows the correlation between the SalePrice column and all other columns in the data.  
`housing['SalePrice'].skew()` shows the skew of the SalePrice column distribution in the housing DataFrame.  
`df.sample(n=5, replace=False)` samples 5 random rows in the dataframe and ensures each row only shows up once.  
`df['species'].to_frame()` displays the output of the species column as a DataFrame.  
`normaltest(df.price)` outputs the p-value for the price column (with a small value indicating that the data is not normally distributed).  

## Methods for change  
`.replace('current', 'new', inplace=True)` input an element for replacement and its replacement. Can include lists.  
`data['brand'].replace(['vw', 'vokswagen'], 'volkswagen')` replaces the names vw and vokswagen in the brand column with the name volkswagen.  
`.append()` adds inputted element into a list.  
`.astype()` used to change the data type of elements.  
`df.apply(pd.to_numeric, errors='coerce')` converts all data to type float.  
`.lower()` all letters lower case.  
`.upper()` all letters upper case.  
`.title()` capitalises the first letter of every word.  
`.capitalize()` capitalises the first letter of the first word in a sentence.  
`.strip()` removes any spaces on either side of a word.  
`.split()` splits a string into its components.  
`.drop("Lot Frontage", axis=1, inplace=True)` drops the whole column Lot Frontage from the DataFrame.  
`df.drop(df.index[[8, 12]])` drops rows 8 and 12.  
`.dropna(axis=0)` drops rows with missing values from a DataFrame along the 0-axis (rows).  
`.dropna(axis=0, subset=[column_list])` drops rows with missing values in specific columns.  
`.dropna(axis=0, thresh=n)` drops rows that have fewer than n non-missing values. It allows you to specify a threshold for the number of non-missing values required to keep a row.  
`.dropna(axis=0, how='all')` drops rows where all values are missing. It removes rows that have missing values in all columns.  
`.dropna(axis=0, inplace=True)` drops rows with missing values and modifies the original DataFrame in place, instead of returning a new DataFrame.  
`.drop_duplicates(subset = [‘name’, ‘breed’])` drop rows where duplicates are found in the name and breed columns.  
`np.log(housing['SalePrice'])` transforms data to exhibit properties of a normal distribution.  
`housing["Lot Frontage"].fillna(median, inplace = True)` fills missing values in the Lot Frontage column in the housing DataFrame with the median value.  
`df.fillna(method='ffill')` fills the last observed non-null value forward until another non-null value is encountered.  
`data['species'].apply(lambda x: x[5:])` amends data in the species column of the data DataFrame to start from the fifth character.  
`df.rename(columns={"Reg":"Skew"}, inplace=True)` renames the column Reg to Skew.  
`data['Airline'] = np.where(data['Airline']=='Vistara Premium economy', 'Vistara', data['Airline'])` used to combine the column Vistara Premium economy with the column Vistara.  
`data.CarName.str.split(' ').str.get(0)` splits the data in the CarName column by space character into separate strings and extracts the first string.  
`df.merge(avg_price, on = 'brand')` merges the data avg_price with the df DataFrame based on the brand column.  


## Visualisations  
`sns.boxplot(data=df)` useful for spotting outliers (one variable should be categorical).  
`sns.barplot(data=df, y='churn_value', x='payment')` plotting payment type vs churn rate for customers.  
`sns.distplot(housing['SalePrice'])` useful to see if the SalePrice variable follows a normal distribution. Known as Gaussian KDE function.  
`sns.pairplot(data=df, hue='species', size=3)` scatter plots showing the relationship of all features in the DataFrame.  
`sns.jointplot(x, y, kind='hex')` similar to scatter plot but visually shows density.  
`sns.heatmap(df.corr(), annot=False, cmap='RdYlGn')` heatmap of the correlations between all columns in the DataFrame - good for identifying multicollinearity.  
`sns.scatterplot(x = data.horsepower,y = data.price)` scatter plot of car horsepower vs price.  
`df.plot.scatter(x='Area', y='Price')` scatter plot of the columns Area vs Price.  
`df.plot(kind='bar', figsize = (8,6), fontsize = 10)` plots a bar chart of the columns in the DataFrame.  
`df.column.hist()` plots a histogram of a column in a DataFrame.  
`plt.hist(df.column)` another way to plot a histogram.  
`df.groupby('species').mean().plot(color=['red','blue','black','green'])` groups by the species and plots the mean for the four other features.  
`data.groupby('brand', as_index=False)['price'].mean()` as_index=False ensures that the brand column remains in the resulting DataFrame as a regular column.  
`sns.residplot(data=df_dummies, x='enginesize', y='price')` plots the residuals/variance between enginesize and price.  
`msno.matrix(dataset, figsize=(10,5), fontsize=11)` plot to highlight missing information.  
 
## Variable transformation  
`pd.get_dummies(X4, columns=['House Style'], drop_first=True)` one-hot-encoding.  
`pd.replace({"non-stop":0,"1 stop":1,"2 stops":2,"3 stops":3,"4 stops":4},inplace=True)` label encoding manually renames data.  
`pd.cut(df['Arrival_Hour'], [0,6,12,18,24], labels=['Night','Morning','Afternoon','Evening'])` used to categorize or "cut" a numeric column into discrete bins based on the provided bin edges. Used to create categorical variables from continuous or numerical data.  

## Datetimes  
`pd.to_datetime(df["Date_of_Journey"], format="%d/%m/%Y").dt.month` extracts the month.  
`pd.to_datetime(df['Date_of_Journey']).dt.day_name()` extracts the day of the week.  

## String transformation  
`print(f"The average charges are: {sch_mean:,.0f}")` prints the number to zero decimal places and includes a thousands separator.  
`print(f"Accuracy is: {accuracy:.2f}")` prints to two decimal places.  

## Files  
`raw_df = pd.read_csv(data_url, sep="\s+", skiprows=22, header=None)` import file - \s+ indicates that the delimiter is one or more whitespace characters (spaces or tabs).  
`df.to_csv('cleaned_car_data.csv', index=False)` save the DataFrame to a csv file.  

## Scoring  
`r2_score(y_test,y_predicted)` or `lr.score(X_test, y_test)` produce the same result.  

## GridSearch  
`model.best_estimator_` outputs the best hyperparameters.  
`model.best_params_` outputs the best hyperparameters.  

## Models  
`model.classes` outputs the classes that have been encoded.  


